+++
title = "Flexibility in Mannan-Binding Lectin-Associated Serine Proteases-1 and -2 Provides Insight on Lectin Pathway Activation"
date = "2017-02-01"
authors = ["R. Nan","C. M Furze","D. W Wright","J. Gor","R. Wallis","S. J Perkins"]
publication_types = ["2"]
publication = "_Structure_"
publication_short = ""
abstract = "The lectin pathway of complement is activated by complexes comprising a recognition component (mannose-binding lectin, serum ficolins, collectin-LK or collectin-K1) and a serine protease (MASP-1 or MASP-2). MASP-1 activates MASP-2, and MASP-2 cleaves C4 and C4b-bound C2. To clarify activation, new crystal structures of Ca2+-bound MASP dimers were determined, together with their solution structures from X-ray scattering, analytical ultracentrifugation, and atomistic modeling. Solution structures of the CUB1-EGF-CUB2 dimer of each MASP indicate that the two CUB2 domains were tilted by as much as 90° compared with the crystal structures, indicating considerable flexibility at the EGF-CUB2 junction. Solution structures of the full-length MASP dimers in their zymogen and activated forms revealed similar structures that were much more bent than anticipated from crystal structures. We conclude that MASP-1 and MASP-2 are flexible at multiple sites and that this flexibility may permit both intra- and inter-complex activation."
image_preview = ""
selected = false
projects = []
url_custom = [{name = "DOI", url = "http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.str.2016.12.014"}]
math = true
highlight = false
[header]
image = ""
caption = ""
+++

